---
title: "PAOLA, uma Ferramenta para o desenvolvimento de Aplicações baseadas em Ontologias para o projeto LARISSA"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2012-08-10-paola
venue: "Universidade Estadual do Ceará (UECE)"
date: 2012-08-10
location: "Fortaleza, CE, BRA"
---

Lariisa is a decision making project for public health systems governance. It integrates patient data from their homes for the construction of intelligent systems capable of supporting the making of decisions in different situations. The Lariisa project has representation of contextual information to be used by context-aware applications and knowledge representation through the use of ontologies. The application development in the Larissa project is complex because it involves the knowledge representation (information gathered from diverse actors in the system, represented domain, diverse related data bases, among others) and the gathering of contextual information through hardware mechanisms that feed the existing inference mechanisms. The lack of mechanisms that support the development of these applications makes it difficult to use the Lariisa project in satisfying its objectives, resulting in ad-hoc solutions with specific scopes that take longer and cost more. This dissertation presents PAOLA (Platform for Lariisa Ontological Applications). It is a mechanism that facilitates the application development in the Lariisa project, taking into consideration their specificities. The Paola platform integrates contextual information originating from Lisa architecture (Lariisa Integration System Architecture) with ontological editors and frameworks based on knowledge (ex.: Protégé-OWL). Because of this, it enables the Lariisa project developer to use functions such as searching (in different data bases), the reuse and the edition of ontologies and the definition of rules for the creation of new applications. Of course the Paola platform offers functions inherent to the Lariisa project necessary to new applications sensitive to context as well as other tools that can help to develop the definition of its applications (ex.: contextual examples) and in development (ex.: templates, tutorial).